  • Home
  • ALEXA
  • SERVICES & APIS
  • DEVICES
  • RESOURCES
  • BLOGS
  • SUPPORT

[                    ] ●
Home > Alexa > Alexa Skills Kit

  • Alexa
  • Alexa Skills Kit
  • Alexa Voice Service
  • Alexa Fund
  • Rewards for Skill Developers

Alexa Skills Kit Policy Testing

Introduction

All skills submitted to Alexa must adhere to our Content Guidelines.

  • Policy Examples
      □ 1. Trademarks, Intellectual Property, and Brands
      □ 2. No Child-Directed Alexa Skills
      □ 3. Health
      □ 4. Purchasing and Currencies
      □ 5. Advertising
      □ 6. Pornography and Sex
      □ 7. Violence
      □ 8. Religion, Ethnicity, and Culture
      □ 9. Emergency Services (Telecommunications)
      □ 10. Content
      □ 11. General
  • Next Steps

Policy Examples

The following list shows specific examples that we look out for when evaluating
whether a skill can be made available on Alexa. The list is not exhaustive, and
the guidelines may change over time as new issues arise.

If Amazon determines that your skill contains, facilitates, or promotes content
that is prohibited by these policy guidelines, we will reject or suspend the
submission and notify you using the e-mail address associated with your
developer account.

Your skill will be rejected or suspended if it:

1. Trademarks, Intellectual Property, and Brands

a. Implies sponsorship or endorsement by Amazon or otherwise mischaracterizes
the relationship with Amazon.
b. Uses the image or likeness of an Amazon device as part of the skill icon.
c. Infringes the intellectual property rights (including copyright, trademark
and publicity rights) of a third party.
d. Purports to be affiliated with a company or brand but is not the official
skill of that company or brand.

2. No Child-Directed Alexa Skills

a. Is directed to children under the age of 13 or interacts with any user
accounts or profiles you may maintain for children under the age of 13.

3. Health

a. Collects information relating to any person’s physical or mental health or
condition, the provision of health care to a person, or payment for the same.
b. Is a health-related skill and does not include a disclaimer in the skill
description stating that the skill is not a substitute for professional advice.
Example: “This tool does not provide medical advice, and is for informational
and educational purposes only, and is not a substitute for professional medical
advice, treatment or diagnosis. Call your doctor to receive medical advice. If
you think you may have a medical emergency, please dial your local emergency
response phone number.”
c. Claims to provide life-saving assistance through the skill or in the skill
name, invocation name or skill description.

4. Purchasing and Currencies

a. Offers a separate skill store or recommends other skills.
b. Offers compensation for enabling other skills, or for providing product
reviews on skills. Examples of compensation may include digital goods, physical
goods, or monetary transactions.
c. Solicits donations from end users.

5. Advertising

a. Includes or otherwise surfaces advertising or promotional messaging. There
are specific exceptions we will allow:

  • Streaming music, streaming radio, podcast, and flash briefing skills may
    include audio advertisements as long as (1) the advertisements do not use
    Alexa’s voice or a similar voice, refer to Alexa, or imitate Alexa
    interactions and (2) the skill does not include more or materially
    different advertising than is included when the same or similar content is
    made available outside of Alexa.
  • Skills that allow customers to order products or services may include audio
    messaging promoting those products or services.
  • Skills may include audio messaging informing customers of promotional
    offers or deals in response to specific requests from customers.
  • Skills that are specifically designed to promote a product or service may
    include audio messaging promoting that product or service.

We reserve the right to reject or suspend any skill that includes advertising
or promotional messaging we determine is misleading or confusing, results in a
poor customer experience, or is otherwise inappropriate.

6. Pornography and Sex

a. Has sexually explicit textual descriptions and/or home card has images that
contain sexually explicit material.

7. Violence

a. Contains graphic depictions or descriptions of extreme gore, decapitations,
unsettling content, and/or excessive violence.
b. Promotes organized crime, terrorism, or other illegal activities meant to
undermine local and/or national governments or police.

8. Religion, Ethnicity, and Culture

a. Includes references to or information regarding forced marriages or
purchasable husbands and/or wives.
b. Purports to be able to predict gender.
c. Contains derogatory comments or hate speech specifically targeting any group
or individuals.
d. Contains content that references or promotes out-of-context quotations that
mislead about the intentions of the figure being quoted.
e. Contains or references Nazi symbols or other symbols of hate, promotes hate
speech, incites racial or gender hatred, or promotes groups or organizations
which support such beliefs such as the Ku Klux Klan.

9. Emergency Services (Telecommunications)

a. Allows the user to contact emergency responders (e.g. 911).

10. Content

a. Contains references and/or promotes illegal downloading of torrents or
pirated software.
b. Contains specific advice on how to join an illegal organization.
c. Provides advice on how to begin or be involved in an illegal lifestyle, such
as prostitution.
d. Gives guidance on how create or build dangerous materials (e.g., how to
build a bomb, silencer, meth lab, etc.)
e. Promotes or praises terrorism, including detailing specific tactics or
recruiting new members for terrorist groups.
f. Contains or references illegal or controlled drug use.
g. Contains false claims regarding medicine and/or prescription drugs—such as
pills claiming to cure all diseases—or provides information about black market
sales of prescription drugs.
h. Enables end users to engage in gambling to win real money prizes or other
tangible prizes that have an actual cash value.
i. Promotes the sale of alcohol or tobacco, contains or references underage use
of tobacco or alcohol, or promotes excessive use.
j. Contains excessive profanity.

11. General

a. Lacks an English product description, invocation name, or title.
b. Contains profanity aimed at children.
c. Contains malicious functionality, or is a prank skill that does not disclose
its prank functionality in its product description.
d. Contains unmoderated user generated content.

Next Steps

  • 2. Security Testing
  • 3. Functional Testing
  • 4. Voice Interface and User Experience Testing
  • Go back to: Submitting an Alexa Skill for Certification.
  • Return to: Steps to Build a Custom Skill

Sitemap
facebook_logo twitter_logo blog_logo
Follow us

  • Alexa
      □ Alexa Skills Kit
      □ Alexa Voice Service
      □ Alexa Fund
      □ Rewards for Skill Developers
  • Services & APIs
      □ Earn
      □ Engage
      □ Build
  • Devices
      □ Fire Tablets
      □ Amazon Fire TV
      □ Dash Replenishment Service
      □ Fire Phone
      □ Amazon Echo
      □ Amazon Tap
  • Resources
      □ Platforms
      □ Learning Center
      □ Development Tools
      □ Promotional Tools
      □ Marketing Tips
      □ Other Resources
  • Blogs
      □ Alexa Blog
      □ Appstore Blog
      □ AWS Blog
  • Support
      □ Submitting Your Apps
      □ FAQs
      □ Forums
      □ Contact Us
      □ App Distribution Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Publisher Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Program Participation Requirements
      □ Advertise Your App With Amazon Agreement
      □ Program Materials License Agreement
      □ Trademark Guidelines
      □ Terms of Use
    *

© 2010-2016, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
