  • Home
  • ALEXA
  • SERVICES & APIS
  • DEVICES
  • RESOURCES
  • BLOGS
  • SUPPORT

[                    ] ●
Home > Alexa > Alexa Skills Kit

  • Alexa
  • Alexa Skills Kit
  • Alexa Voice Service
  • Alexa Fund
  • Rewards for Skill Developers

Alexa Skills Kit Security Testing

Introduction

To protect customer data, the cloud-based service for your skill must meet
Amazon’s security requirements. The specific requirements depend on whether you
are hosting using AWS Lambda or your own endpoint. AWS Lambda is a service
offering by Amazon Web Services.

  • 2.1. Skills Hosted as Lambda Functions
  • 2.2. Skills Hosted as Web Services on Your Own Endpoint
  • 2.3. Skills with Account Linking
  • 2.4. Skills that Allow Unlocking or Disarming
  • 2.5 Skills for Booking Reservations
  • 2.6 Privacy Requirements
  • Next Steps

2.1. Skills Hosted as Lambda Functions

Your Lambda function must ensure that requests are intended for your service,
as discussed in the “Verifying that the Request is Intended for Your Service”
section of Handling Requests Sent by Alexa.

2.2. Skills Hosted as Web Services on Your Own Endpoint

  • The web service must present a valid, trusted certificate when the
    connection is established and must possess the corresponding private key.
    Amazon only trusts certificates that have been signed by an Amazon-approved
    certificate authority.
      □ The Amazon-approved certificate authorities includes the certificate
        list here with the exception of https://letsencrypt.org/.
  • Self-signed certificates cannot be used for published skills.
  • The service must verify that incoming requests were sent by the Alexa
    service. You can do this by validating the request signature as discussed
    in the “Verifying that the Request was Sent by Alexa” section of Hosting a
    Custom Skill as a Web Service.

    Note: the Java library provided with the Alexa Skills Kit provides a
    disableRequestSignature flag in the SpeechletServlet class that you can use
    for testing. If you used this while testing, be sure to set it back to
    false when you are ready to submit for certification.

  • The service must ensure that incoming requests are intended for your
    service, as discussed in the “Verifying that the Request is Intended for
    Your Service” section of Handling Requests Sent by Alexa.

2.3. Skills with Account Linking

If your skill needs to connect the identity of the end user with a user in
another system (account linking), please verify that your skill follows all the
instructions defined in Linking an Alexa User with a User in Your System. When
submitting your skill, be sure to provide a valid set of account credentials
with your testing instructions so our certification team can verify the account
linking and functionality of your skill. Your skill must also pass the
following account linking criteria:

  • The skill must use Amazon’s account linking feature by redirecting the user
    to a login page or landing page when enabling the skill with the Alexa app.
  • The skill’s privacy policy and terms of use links displayed in the Alexa
    app must each open to a valid web page.
  • If you are the owner of the credential system, your skill must pass the
    following criteria:
      □ You must own the domain presenting the login page.
      □ The login page must be served over HTTPS.
  • If you are not the owner of the credential system, your skill must pass the
    following criteria:
      □ You must own the landing page that users are directed to when enabling
        your skill. This landing page must clearly communicate which
        third-party (3P) accounts are needed to link the account to the skill.
      □ The landing page must direct the user to the domain login page owned by
        the OAuth providers and must be served over HTTPS.
      □ You may not directly handle, store, or transmit credentials on behalf
        of the user.
  • If you are using Login with Amazon, your skill must pass the following
    criteria:
      □ The login page URL must be from amazon.com and the page must be served
        over HTTPS.
      □ The login page must clearly communicate which third-party (3P) accounts
        are needed to link the account to the skill.
      □ The page must display your skill’s icon or logo and the Amazon logo.
      □ You must clearly state the customer information your skill is
        collecting and using. This can be directly on the login page or in your
        privacy policy.
    Tip: For a detailed walk-through for using Login with Amazon with the Alexa
    Skills Kit, see 5 Steps to Seamlessly Link Your Alexa Skill with Login with
    Amazon.

2.4. Skills that Allow Unlocking or Disarming

If your skill lets the user unlock or disarm a device, you must require the
user to speak a PIN of at least four digits before executing the unlock /
disarm action. Customers cannot opt out of the PIN requirements, although you
can provide reduced functionality for customers who don’t want to enable a PIN.
The PIN is recommended, but not required for locking or arming a device.

   Test                                        Expected Results
   Enable the skill and complete the account     • The PIN must be at least
   linking process. Ensure that the account        four digits long.
1. linking flow includes setting a PIN to        • The flow reminds the user to
   access unlock functionality and the PIN         reset the PIN every 60 days.
   meets the security requirements.

   If the skill offers reduced functionality     • The requests to unlock or
   when no PIN is set, disable the skill or        disarm are not executed. The
   log in to the Alexa app as an Alexa user        user is instructed to set a
2. who has not yet enabled the skill. Enable       PIN to use these features.
   the skill, but do not set the PIN when        • Features other than unlock/
   prompted. Attempt to invoke the intents         disarm do work normally
   that let the user unlock or disarm a            without the PIN.
   device.

   Invoke each intent that lets a user unlock  Each request to unlock or disarm
3. or disarm a device.                         a device asks the user to speak
                                               the PIN.

                                                 • The skill rejects the
                                                   incorrect PIN and does not
                                                   complete the unlock or
   Invoke each intent that lets a user unlock      disarm request.
   or disarm a device. When prompted for the     • After three consecutive
4. PIN, speak an incorrect PIN. Provide an         incorrect PIN attempts, the
   incorrect PIN at least three times.             skill instructs you to reset
                                                   your PIN. Attempting a
                                                   fourth request with the
                                                   original, correct PIN now
                                                   fails.

2.5 Skills for Booking Reservations

If your skill lets users book reservations for hotels, rental cars, or airline
tickets, the skill must:

  • Note this feature in the description.
  • Use account linking to connect the user with your system.
  • Require the user to confirm the booking before it is completed. This can be
    using a phrase such as “Yes,” “OK,” or other similar responses.
  • Provide a confirmation that the skill completed the booking via voice,
    skill card, and email.

   Test                                      Expected Results
                                             The skill’s description mentions
1. Review the description for the skill.     the ability to book reservations
                                             for hotels, rental cars, or
                                             airline tickets.

   Verify that your skill follows all the    The skill is set up to use account
2. instructions defined in Linking an Alexa  linking, and passes the tests
   User with a User in Your System.          described in 2.3. Skills with
                                             Account Linking

                                               • The skill asks you for
                                                 confirmation before completing
3. Start an interaction with the skill and       the booking.
   attempt to create a reservation.            • Stating a phrase like “Yes,”
                                                 “OK,” or “sure” confirms the
                                                 booking.

                                               • The skill completes the
                                                 booking
   Start an interaction with the skill and     • You receive confirmation via
4. attempt to create a reservation. When         voice
   prompted to confirm, use one of the         • A card is sent to the Alexa
   acceptance phrases such as “Yes.”             app confirming the booking.
                                               • You receive an email
                                                 confirming the booking.

2.6 Privacy Requirements

The skill must not:

 1. Contain references to or include malicious hacking, such as phishing or
    Trojans. This includes rooting a device or circumventing Amazon’s or any
    developer’s digital rights management (DRM) software.
 2. Contain references to or include malicious user spying or tracking,
    including stalking, in the skill or skill metadata.
 3. Misuse customer personally identifiable information or sensitive personal
    information.
 4. Collect personal information from end users without doing all of the
    following: (i) provide notice of that data collection to end users in your
    skill’s detail page,
    (ii) use the information in a way that end users have consented to, and
    (iii) ensure that your collection and use of that information complies with
    your privacy notice and all applicable laws.

    Prior to submitting a skill that collects personal information from end
    users, you are required to supply a privacy policy that will be displayed
    to end users on your skill’s detail page in the Alexa App.

Next Steps

  • 1. Policy Testing
  • 3. Functional Testing
  • 4. Voice Interface and User Experience Testing
  • Go back to: Submitting an Alexa Skill for Certification.
  • Return to: Steps to Build a Custom Skill

Sitemap
facebook_logo twitter_logo blog_logo
Follow us

  • Alexa
      □ Alexa Skills Kit
      □ Alexa Voice Service
      □ Alexa Fund
      □ Rewards for Skill Developers
  • Services & APIs
      □ Earn
      □ Engage
      □ Build
  • Devices
      □ Fire Tablets
      □ Amazon Fire TV
      □ Dash Replenishment Service
      □ Fire Phone
      □ Amazon Echo
      □ Amazon Tap
  • Resources
      □ Platforms
      □ Learning Center
      □ Development Tools
      □ Promotional Tools
      □ Marketing Tips
      □ Other Resources
  • Blogs
      □ Alexa Blog
      □ Appstore Blog
      □ AWS Blog
  • Support
      □ Submitting Your Apps
      □ FAQs
      □ Forums
      □ Contact Us
      □ App Distribution Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Publisher Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Program Participation Requirements
      □ Advertise Your App With Amazon Agreement
      □ Program Materials License Agreement
      □ Trademark Guidelines
      □ Terms of Use
    *

© 2010-2016, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
