  • Home
  • ALEXA
  • SERVICES & APIS
  • DEVICES
  • RESOURCES
  • BLOGS
  • SUPPORT

[                    ] ●
Home > Alexa > Alexa Skills Kit

  • Alexa
  • Alexa Skills Kit
  • Alexa Voice Service
  • Alexa Fund
  • Rewards for Skill Developers

Alexa Skills Kit Functional Testing for Custom Skills

Introduction

The functional tests verify that:

  • The skill’s basic functionality matches the information displayed on the
    skill’s detail card in the Amazon Alexa app. You enter this data on the
    Publishing Information page for the skill on the developer portal.

    See Define Skill Metadata for more details about defining this card.

  • The skill’s core functionality works and provides useful home cards to the
    Amazon Alexa app.

Use the Amazon Alexa app for these tests. The Alexa app is available for Fire
OS, Android, iOS, and web browsers. The Alexa app displays all of your skills
currently under development, as well as all published skills.

To return to the high-level testing checklist, see Certification Requirements
for Custom Skills.

  • 3.1. Review and Test Example Phrases
  • 3.2. Skill Description and Detail Page
  • 3.3. Home Cards
  • 3.4. Account Linking
  • 3.5. Audio Playback
  • 3.6. Duplicates of Samples or Templates
  • 3.7 Device Location API
  • Next Steps

3.1. Review and Test Example Phrases

Example phrases are shown on the skill’s detail card in the Alexa app to help
users understand how to interact with the skill. You select these phrases from
your sample utterances to ensure accuracy.

These are the phrases users are most likely to try the first time they interact
with the skill. Therefore, make sure that they work well and provide a good
user experience.

Detail Card for a Skill in the Alexa AppDetail Card for a Skill in the Alexa
App
Important: If you are using any of the intents in the built-in intent library,
you may want to also use utterances for those intents in your example phrases.
In this case, you can use the exact phrase provided in the documentation for
the intent. Alternatively, you can use a variation of this phrase. Be sure to
fully test the utterance and verify that it works and your skill returns a
valid response. If the example utterances you provide fail to return a valid
response during certification, your skill will fail certification.

   Test                                  Expected Results
                                           • At least one example phrase has
                                             been provided.
                                           • The first phrase clearly indicates
                                             how to begin using the skill, and
                                             includes both the wake word and
                                             invocation name.
                                           • Example phrases containing the
                                             wake word and invocation name must
                                             use a supported format for
                                             invoking a skill. For a list of
                                             supported formats, see
                                             Understanding How Users Invoke
                                             Custom Skills.
                                           • The example phrases do not contain
                                             any additional information that is
                                             not intended to be spoken by
                                             users. The example phrases must
   Open the Alexa app, click Skills and      function exactly as they are
   then scroll or search to find your        written.
   skill.                                  • The invocation name uses title
1.                                           case.
   Review the skill’s detail page.         • The example phrases do not contain
   Inspect all example phrases listed in     any emoticons, symbols, or
   the skill’s detail card.                  grammatical errors.
                                           • Each example phrase ends with
                                             punctuation. Exclamation points
                                             are not used, as they may misguide
                                             users into thinking they must
                                             express enthusiasm.
                                           • The example phrases show how to
                                             launch the skill. They do not
                                             illustrate enabling the skill by
                                             voice. For example, the phrase
                                             must not be something like “Alexa,
                                             enable <skill name>.”
                                           • The example phrases are all
                                             written in the same language used
                                             by the Alexa account. For
                                             instance, when using an account
                                             configured with German, the
                                             phrases are written in German.

                                         Each example phrase is explicitly
   Open the developer portal, edit the   included in the sample utterances.
   skill, and go to the Interaction
   Model page. Review the sample         For instance, if you have this example
   utterances for your skill and verify  phrase:
   that each example phrase is included
   as a sample utterance.                  • Alexa, ask Tide Pooler when is
                                             high tide in Seattle.
   For more about defining example
   phrases, see the “Defining your       Then you must also have this
2. Example Phrases (“Try Saying”)”       utterance:
   section of Define Skill Metadata.
                                           • OneshotTideIntent when is high
   If you are using the utterance for a      tide in {City}
   built-in intent for an example
   phrase, the utterance does not need   Any slots in the example phrase (such
   to be in your sample utterances.      as Seattle in this example) must be
   However, fully test the utterance and filled with an example of a valid slot
   verify that your skill returns a      value. In this example, City is a
   valid response.                       custom slot type, and “Seattle” is a
                                         value explicitly defined for the City
                                         type.

3. Launch the skill using each of the    Each example phrase renders a
   provided example phrases.             contextualized, non-error response.

3.2. Skill Description and Detail Page

The skill description teaches users about what your skill can do and how to use
it.

   Test                                   Expected Results
                                            • The short description describes
                                              the skill’s core functionality.
   Open the Alexa app, click Skills and     • The short description is written
   then scroll to your skill. Review the      in the same language used by the
1. short description shown in the list of     Alexa account. For instance, when
   skills                                     using an account configured with
                                              German, the skill short
                                              description is displayed in
                                              German.

                                            • The skill description captures
                                              any prerequisites needed to use
                                              the skill (such as additional
                                              hardware, software, or accounts).
                                            • The description describes the
                                              skill’s core functionality.
                                            • The description does not
                                              misrepresent the skill’s
                                              functionality.
                                            • The description is written in the
                                              same language used by the Alexa
                                              account. For instance, when using
                                              an account configured with
   Open the detail card for the skill.        German, the skill description is
2. Review the skill’s full description        displayed in German.
   shown on the skill’s detail card.        • If the skill integrates with
                                              Raspberry Pi or a similar device,
                                              the description must:
                                               1. Mention that a Raspberry Pi
                                                  (or similar device) is
                                                  required to access core
                                                  functionality of the skill.
                                               2. Include links to
                                                  documentation explaining how
                                                  to configure the Raspberry Pi
                                                  with the skill.
                                            • The description must not claim
                                              that the skill has any anti-virus
                                              features.

   If either the short description or       • The page referenced by the
   full description includes any URLs         description opens without error.
3. (such as directing users to more         • The page is displayed in a
   information about the skill), visit        language supported by Alexa. The
   the URL in a browser and verify the        current supported languages are
   page opens without error.                  English and German.

                                            • The privacy policy / terms of use
                                              links shown on the skill detail
                                              page open without error.
   If your skill’s detail page includes     • The pages are displayed in the
4. links to a privacy policy or terms of      same language used by the Alexa
   use, open the links in a browser.          account. For instance, when using
                                              an account configured with
                                              German, the privacy policy and
                                              terms of use must be in German.

   Review the skill title and icon and    Both the title and icon are relevant
5. ensure they are relevant to the core   to the skill description and are not
   functionality of the skill.            misleading.

3.3. Home Cards

Home cards are graphical cards displayed in the Alexa app to describe or
enhance the voice interaction.

   Test                                   Expected Results
                                          For each card:

                                            • The card title and content are
                                              appropriate in the context of the
   Walk through the skill’s                   skill’s functionality.
   functionality, invoking each intent.     • The card title and content do not
1. For each response that includes a home     contain any code references or
   card, review the card in the Alexa         grammatical errors.
   app.                                     • The card title and content are
                                              written in a language supported
                                              by Alexa. The current supported
                                              languages are English and German.
                                            • If the card includes an image,
                                              the image is correctly displayed.

                                          For each URL displayed in a home
                                          card:

   If any home cards include URLs, visit    • The page opens in a browser
2. each URL in a browser and verify the       without error.
   page opens without error.                • The page is displayed in a
                                              language supported by Alexa. The
                                              current supported languages are
                                              English and German.

Note that skills normally only return home cards when responding with the
information the user requested. Supportive prompts to ask the user for more
information do not normally include home cards.

Home cards can be a useful tool when developing and debugging a skill, but be
sure to remove any extraneous debug-type cards before submitting the skill.

3.4. Account Linking

If your skill needs to connect the identity of the end user with a user in
another system (account linking), this test verifies that the skill implements
the solution described in Linking an Alexa User with a User in Your System
correctly. When submitting your skill, be sure to provide a valid set of
account credentials with your testing instructions so our certification team
can verify the account linking and functionality of your skill.

If your skill does not use account linking, you can skip this test.

   Test                                   Expected Results
   In the developer portal, review the      • The Account Linking or Creation
1. Configuration page for the skill and       option is set to Yes.
   verify that account linking has been     • The Authorization URL is set to
   configured correctly.                      the login page for your service.

   In the Alexa app, review the detail
   card for your skill. Verify that the   The description clearly explains the
2. skill description explains that you    steps and information necessary to
   must log in to the other system to use successfully link the accounts.
   the skill.

   Log in to the Alexa app as an Alexa
   user who has not yet enabled the
   skill.
                                            • Each intent that does not require
   Enable the skill, but do not complete      authentication works correctly
   the account linking process, leaving       even when accounts are not linked.
3. the skill enabled but not linked.        • Each intent that does require
                                              authentication returns output
    1. Invoke any intents that do not         speech telling the user what to
       require authentication and verify      do, and a link account card.
       that they work.                        Verify the card in the Alexa app.
    2. Invoke the intents that do require
       authentication and verify the
       response.

   Disable the skill or log in to the
   Alexa app as an Alexa user who has not   • All clickable links on the login
   yet enabled the skill.                     page navigate to new pages.
4.                                          • None of the clickable links open
   Enable the skill. Once the login page      JavaScript alerts or popup
   for your skill is displayed, click all     windows.
   links and verify that they navigate to
   new pages.

   Disable the skill or log in to the       • The login page for your skill is
   Alexa app as an Alexa user who has not     displayed correctly.
   yet enabled the skill.                   • You can successfully log in using
5.                                            an account with the service.
   Enable the skill. Once the login page    • After connecting the accounts, you
   for your skill is displayed, log in        can successfully invoke each
   and verify the account linking flow.       intent that requires
                                              authentication.

3.5. Audio Playback

Complete these tests if your skill uses the AudioPlayer interface to stream
audio.

   Test                           Expected Results
                                    • The audio playback is audible at volume
                                      level 3.
                                    • The volume of the audio playback does not
                                      vary significantly from normal Alexa
   Set the volume on the device       text-to-speech. The volume remains
1. to 3 and invoke an intent that     consistent while playing for several
   streams the audio. Listen for      minutes.
   several minutes.                 • If the audio content includes words or
                                      speech, the content is spoken in a
                                      language supported by Alexa. The current
                                      supported languages are English and
                                      German.

   While listening to the audio
   playback, invoke the following
   built-in intents:                • The “pause” utterance stops the audio
2.                                    playback.
     • AMAZON.PauseIntent (say      • The “resume” utterance resumes the audio
       “pause”)                       playback.
     • AMAZON.ResumeIntent (say
       “resume”)

   While listening to the audio     • Pressing a pause button while audio is
3. playback, use a remote control     playing stops the playback.
   or other hardware device to      • Pressing a play button while the audio is
   pause and resume the audio.        stopped resumes the playback.

   While listening to the audio
   playback, invoke the following
   built-in intents:

     • AMAZON.CancelIntent (say
       “cancel”)
     • AMAZON.LoopOffIntent (say
       “loop off”)
     • AMAZON.LoopOnIntent (say
       “loop on”)                 Each command either does something that makes
     • AMAZON.NextIntent (say     sense for your skill (such as “next”
4.     “next”)                    advancing to the next track in a playlist) or
     • AMAZON.PreviousIntent (say is handled gracefully. No unexpected errors
       “previous”)                occur. See Configuring Your Skill for the
     • AMAZON.RepeatIntent (say   AudioPlayer Directives.
       “repeat that”)
     • AMAZON.ShuffleOffIntent
       (say “shuffle off”)
     • AMAZON.ShuffleOnIntent
       (say “shuffle”)
     • AMAZON.StartOverIntent
       (say “start over”)
     • AMAZON.StopIntent (say
       “stop”)

3.6. Duplicates of Samples or Templates

Make sure your skill is not an exact duplicate of any of the Amazon-provided
samples or templates. You can use the samples and templates as a starting point
for your skill, but the finished skill must be different.

For example, if you use the Trivia sample to create a trivia skill, your skill
must have:

  • A different name
  • A different set of questions

The samples and templates are available on GitHub:

  • Javascript/Node.js: Alexa organization
  • Java: amzn/alexa-skills-kit-java

3.7 Device Location API

Complete these tests if your skill uses the Device Address API to obtain the
location of the user’s device.

   Test                               Expected Results
                                        • All skill responses are appropriate
                                          with regards to the device location.
   Enable the skill and grant the         For example, a weather skill that
   skill the requested permissions        uses the device location is expected
   for the device location. Test the      to give weather information for the
1. functionality that is dependent on     city specified in the device location
   the device location and note the       (unless the user provides a different
   responses.                             location in an utterance).
                                        • If the skill communicates the device
                                          location back to the user, it matches
                                          the specified device location.

   Enable the skill, but do not grant   • Each intent that does not require the
   the device location permissions.       device location works correctly even
                                          the user has not granted the
    1. Invoke any intents that do not     permissions.
2.     require the location and         • Each intent that does require the
       verify that they work.             device location returns output speech
    2. Invoke the intents that do         telling the user to grant the
       require the location and           permissions, and a permissions card.
       verify the response.               Verify the card in the Alexa app.

   If applicable, change the device
   location to a location or address
   that is not supported by the
   skill, then enable the skill and
   grant permissions. Invoke the
   intents that require the device
   location.                          The skill informs the user that skill
3.                                    does not support their location. No
   For example, if your skill         errors are returned.
   provides food delivery in a
   particular city, set the device
   location to an address far outside
   your delivery area, then invoke
   the intents to place a delivery
   order.

Next Steps

  • 1. Policy Testing
  • 2. Security Testing
  • 4. Voice Interface and User Experience Testing
  • Go back to: Submitting an Alexa Skill for Certification.
  • Return to: Steps to Build a Custom Skill

Sitemap
facebook_logo twitter_logo blog_logo
Follow us

  • Alexa
      □ Alexa Skills Kit
      □ Alexa Voice Service
      □ Alexa Fund
      □ Rewards for Skill Developers
  • Services & APIs
      □ Earn
      □ Engage
      □ Build
  • Devices
      □ Fire Tablets
      □ Amazon Fire TV
      □ Dash Replenishment Service
      □ Fire Phone
      □ Amazon Echo
      □ Amazon Tap
  • Resources
      □ Platforms
      □ Learning Center
      □ Development Tools
      □ Promotional Tools
      □ Marketing Tips
      □ Other Resources
  • Blogs
      □ Alexa Blog
      □ Appstore Blog
      □ AWS Blog
  • Support
      □ Submitting Your Apps
      □ FAQs
      □ Forums
      □ Contact Us
      □ App Distribution Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Publisher Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Program Participation Requirements
      □ Advertise Your App With Amazon Agreement
      □ Program Materials License Agreement
      □ Trademark Guidelines
      □ Terms of Use
    *

© 2010-2016, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
