  • Home
  • ALEXA
  • SERVICES & APIS
  • DEVICES
  • RESOURCES
  • BLOGS
  • SUPPORT

[                    ] ●
Home > Alexa > Alexa Skills Kit

  • Alexa
  • Alexa Skills Kit
  • Alexa Voice Service
  • Alexa Fund
  • Rewards for Skill Developers

Steps to Build a Custom Skill

Review a step-by-step guide to building a custom skill for Alexa.

This guide provides the steps to create a new custom skill.

Is a custom skill the right type of skill for what you want to build? See
Understanding the Different Types of Skills to learn about other options like
the Smart Home Skill API.

  • Step 1: Design a Voice User Interface
  • Step 2: Set Up the Skill in the Developer Portal
  • Step 3: Use the Voice Design to Build Your Interaction Model
  • Step 4: Write and Test the Code for Your Skill
  • Step 5: Beta Test Your Skill (Optional)
  • Step 6: Submit Your Skill For Certification
  • Your Skill is Published, Now What?

Step 1: Design a Voice User Interface

Designing an effective voice user interface for your skill is a critical first
step that you should do before writing any code. This is the primary way users
will interact with your skill.

 1. Create a flow diagram that maps out how users will interact with the skill.
    This flow diagram should show the requests users will make and the possible
    outcomes of those requests. You use this diagram when designing the
    detailed elements of your interface.
 2. Use the flow diagram to identify the user requests that your skill will
    handle. These will become intents.

Resources:

  • Review Alexa Voice Design Guide as you plan out your voice user interface.
  • Learn how users invoke custom skills.
  • Review best practices for choosing your invocation name.

Step 2: Set Up the Skill in the Developer Portal

Create a new skill in the developer portal. At this point, you can enter a Name
and Invocation Name for your new skill.

Step 3: Use the Voice Design to Build Your Interaction Model

The interaction model refers to your collection of intents, sample utterances,
and the dialog model:

  • The requests your skill can handle are represented as intents.
  • Intents can optionally have arguments called slots.
  • Sample utterances map the intents to the words and phrases users can say to
    interact with your skill.
  • A dialog model identifies information your skill requires and the prompts
    Alexa can use to collect and confirm that information in a conversation
    with the user.

There are two different ways to create these components:

  • Use the the skill builder (beta). The skill builder provides a visual
    interface for defining all components of your interaction model.

    You must use the skill builder (beta) to create a dialog model.

  • Manually create an intent schema and sample utterances in JSON format.

    This option does not include support for the dialog model.

Also see our best practices for sample utterances as you write your utterances.

Step 4: Write and Test the Code for Your Skill

Your primary coding task for your skill is to create a service that can accept
requests from the Alexa service and send back responses.

 1. For the quickest start, create an AWS Lambda function to host the service
    for your skill. AWS Lambda (an Amazon Web Services offering) is a service
    that lets you run code in the cloud without managing servers.

    See: Create an AWS Lambda Function for a Skill.

    Alternatively, you can build a web service for your skill and host it with
    any cloud provider. See Hosting a Custom Skill as a Web Service.

 2. Write the code for your skill. If you are using Lambda, you can code in
    Node.js, Java, Python, or C#. If you are hosting your skill as a web
    service, you can use any programming language.

      □ Handle Requests Sent by Alexa
      □ Include a Card in Your Skill’s Response
      □ Implement the Built-in Intents
      □ Link an Alexa User with a User in Your System
      □ Enhance Your Skills with Address Information
      □ Access the Alexa Shopping and To-Do Lists
 3. In the developer portal, update your skill with your endpoint (for
    instance, the Lambda ARN).

    See Register and Manage Custom Skills in the Developer Portal

 4. Test your skill with the Service Simulator or an Alexa-enabled device.

    See Test a Custom Skill

 5. Update the metadata about your skill that will appear in the Alexa Skills
    Store in the Alexa app.

    See: Define Skill Metadata

Step 5: Beta Test Your Skill (Optional)

Once your skill is finished, you have the option of setting up a beta test for
your skill. With a beta test, you can make your skill available to a limited
group of testers that you have personally selected, rather than to the general
public.

See: Skills Beta Testing

Step 6: Submit Your Skill For Certification

When you are ready to make your skill public, submit it for certification. If
your skill is currently in a beta test, you can still proceed with
certification.

 1. To proceed to certification, first test your skill against the submission
    checklist. This checklist includes the tests performed by Amazon’s
    certification team, so passing all of these tests can speed up the
    certification process.

    See: Certification Requirements for Custom Skills

 2. When you are ready for your skill to be made public, and you have ensured
    that your skill fulfills the requirements on the certification checklist,
    submit your skill for certification.

    See: Submit an Alexa Skill for Certification

Your Skill is Published, Now What?

Once your skill is published, Amazon customers can see it in the Alexa App and
choose to enable and use it.

You can (and should) continue to work on your skill, enhancing its features,
fixing any problems, and improving the experience for your end users. For
recommendations for ongoing skill development and when you need to re-submit
the skill, see the “Creating a New Version of a Live Skill” section in
Submitting the Skill for Certification.

Sitemap
facebook_logo twitter_logo blog_logo
Follow us

  • Alexa
      □ Alexa Skills Kit
      □ Alexa Voice Service
      □ Alexa Fund
      □ Rewards for Skill Developers
  • Services & APIs
      □ Earn
      □ Engage
      □ Build
  • Devices
      □ Fire Tablets
      □ Amazon Fire TV
      □ Dash Replenishment Service
      □ Fire Phone
      □ Amazon Echo
      □ Amazon Tap
  • Resources
      □ Platforms
      □ Learning Center
      □ Development Tools
      □ Promotional Tools
      □ Marketing Tips
      □ Other Resources
  • Blogs
      □ Alexa Blog
      □ Appstore Blog
      □ AWS Blog
  • Support
      □ Submitting Your Apps
      □ FAQs
      □ Forums
      □ Contact Us
      □ App Distribution Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Publisher Agreement
      □ Mobile Ad Network Program Participation Requirements
      □ Advertise Your App With Amazon Agreement
      □ Program Materials License Agreement
      □ Trademark Guidelines
      □ Terms of Use
    *

© 2010-2016, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
