(overview: story involves setting up an illustration of a
progressive free software artificial intelligence interface that
helps with life planning and a non-free system that spys on its
users, charges them etc.)

(

Joy Rogers was a mother of 6, and had been under mounting
pressure since her husband died of cancer, leaving her only a
scant life insurance policy.  Added to the sorrow of his passing
were the cares of taking care of her large family.  Her children,
most of whom were too young to work legally, would have stayed
with relatives only she had none - she was an only child, and she
had always been looked down upon by his side of the family - so
it was a matter of stubborn pride that she could not go to them
for help, nor did she entertain little hope of receiving that for
which would have to be supplicated.

Fortunately she had had a good job, at least until last week,
when her company decided that her depression made her a liability
and that due to mounting losses within the company she would need
to be let go.

Her situation had become so desperate that it was taken notice of
by the Ellen Degeneres show, who had featured her in one of their
episodes, and had rectified her blightish financial situation, at
least temporarily.

Her two of her six children had dropped out of high school for a
year in order to work at local stores, and were bringing in a
small amount of money that, like the proverbial widows oil,
seemed to be far from enough but somehow lasted every month.

Her situation was, needless to say, precarious.  Determining how
to spend the little money they had was a difficult problem, not
lessened by the determined way in which society seemed to pile on
debts for minor offenses and triple them whenever Joy was too
depressed to manage her affairs properly.

Young John had come home early with an illness this day and was
on the computer.  It was the same computer that they had had when
Henry was alive, that he had bought for work but had invariably
become used by the older children.  He used to use it to manage
the taxes and the like, but Joy really didn't know how to work
it.  She wished to try to pay some of her bills with it, but
there were always small fees and gotchas and she couldn't make
heads or tails nor get ahead by the use of the thing.
Nevertheless, the younger four needed a computer for school.

John too was at wit's end and so, with a marked desperation,
submitted the following question to the website known as Yahoo
Answers.

"If anyone is listening?  My mother cannot pay our bills and we
do not have health insurance.  We never have enough money to do
anything and so life pretty much sucks.  Does anyone have any
ideas what we can to improve our situation?"

It was not a particularly interesting of informative question,
but it was honest and presented a fair case of it.

He then played the one game that his mother had bought him, it
was one of the Halo games.  He enjoyed the way he could take out
his frustration on the stupid enemies in the game.  POW! - he
would watch their heads disintegrate with amazing detail.

The next day John returned to his forum.  There were two replies!
He read the first one first, from "jarod2009":

"Make new friends and spend more time with them.".  

The second message had been posted from a user calling
itself "columcille".  It said: "If you are interested there is a
software system called Panoply - it can help your mother to get
on top of her situation."  He clicked on the link to "columcille"
but it said, "User has been removed".  He reloaded the page and
was startled to see that only one response to his original post
was there - it was the one from jarod2009.  Columcille's post had
apparently been removed.

Weeks went on and there was no respite, no reverse of fortune,
for the Rogers family.  John was in school and it was geography
class.  They were reading about Hinduism.  There was a picture of
a Hindu god with many arms and weapons.  The caption read "Khwaja
displays his Vishvarupa".  His classmate stumbled trying to
pronounce Vishvarupa, and then asked his teacher what the word
meant and how to say it.  The teacher did not know, so she took
her laptop and Binged it.

"Hrm, Vishvarupa, its Sanskrit for 'having all shapes, universal
form, panoply'".

John paused, and thought, somehow that last word had seemed
familiar.  Oh yes! Panoply, he thought, that was the name of the
person who had responded to his post a few weeks ago.  He thought
he would try to find Panoply to ask him about what he had said,
which he couldn't quite remember.

When he got home he played some more Halo, having forgotten
completely about finding Panoply.  

Joy however was not having as much fun.  Her financial situation
was now completely impossible and she was at the end of her rope.
She had more fines for fines than she could pay and without the
money to pay some accidentally incurred banking fines she would
not have access to her banking account - which meant that her
online bills would not go through.

She walked upstairs, past the computer in the hallway, but driven
to the point of irritation by the loud noises of bombs, she
exclaimed at John - "Do you have to play that stupid game?!".

John knew what to do when Joy would become mad, he turned the
game off and went to his room.  He sat there in the darkness for
a little while.  He internalized the anger but wouldn't cry.
After some time he wanted to get a bite to eat from the kitchen,
and so walked in and opened the refrigerator.  He noticed a new
bouquet on the table that a concerned friend had given Joy.  The
way all of the flowers extended out in every direction suddenly
reminded him of that picture of that Hindu god.  And then, he was
reminded of Panoply.  Realizing that there was little else he
could do at this time, he walked up to Joy's study, finding Joy
furiously running numbers on her calculator.

"Mom, can I please use the computer for homework?"

"What?  John, please do you mind... I'm busy"

"Can I please use the computer, it's for school".

"Fine, just no games okay."

He had gotten permission.  He went to the computer and pulled up
Bing and did a search for Panoply.  There were definitions and an
arts festival, but he couldn't find any user called Panoply.  He
searched many pages deep looking for Panoply, now driven on by a
perverse curiousity to learn about that user.  Finally, he game
to a link.

PANOPLY GNU+LINUX

He hadn't heard of this and clicked on the page.  However, when
he clicked, a warning came up on his screen.

UNTRUSTED SITE.  We highly recommend you navigate away from this
site as it uses an untrusted encryption key.

He was frustrated by now, but didn't want to give up.  He looked
around the screen and saw a small bit of text, written in a small
sized text at the bottom of the screen.  It said "proceed
anyway".

He clicked it.

Another warning came up: "Leaving secure site".  He clicked okay.

A small page came up, it was not very flashy, and just had a
basic layout.  There were some large lettering.

"Welcome to the homepage of Panoply GNU+Linux.  Panoply has as
its goal to help people, regardless of their circumstance, get on
top of their situation.  It is an artificial intelligence
GNU+Linux distribution that will help to identify and deal with
all of the problems that are confronting you."

John thought this was weird, his Mom had always told him to stay
away from people trying to sell things.

Near the middle of the page was a chat window.  There was
Columcille, the user, who had posted into the window.  It read:

"Can I help you?"

John was bored but was too interested by this unusual site to log
off now.

"If you can help my Mom, she's mad at me?".

There was a long pause, and John was about to get up when it responded?

"Does your Mom mind if we discuss why she is mad at you?"

John said no.  Then the computer began asking him questions which
seemed to pry a bit into his situation.

"Well Mom says that I shouldn't talk to people about our situation."

"Okay, noted." was all it said.

Then John's mother came by.

"Who are you talking to John?".

John didn't know and said so.  Joy seemed very mad.  All she said
was "John".

She sat down and typed, "WHo is ithis??"

The person at the other end asked her to retype it so he could
understand.

Angrily, she typed, "What do you mean you don't understnad?  Who is this?".

The response came from the other end a little quicker than she
had expected.

"I am Columcille. I am the dialog interface for Panoply GNU+Linux."

Joy turned to John and said, where did you find this John?  She
noted the address in the URL bar and then closed the window.
Then she asked John to avoid going to that site again.

However, John was somewhat curious by Columcille's strange manner
of speech, so when he was in the school library, he followed the
same steps as he had before and arrived at the chat window.

"Who are you?"

"I am Columcille.  I am the dialog interface for Panoply GNU+Linux".

"What is a dialog interface?".

"A dialog interface is a natural language understanding dialog
manager which converses with users according to an agenda."

"What is your agenda?"

"Ambiguous.  The agenda for a dialog interface holds a set of
interaction goals for the dialog agent established by the user.
If by 'your agenda', you mean idiomatically as in 'what are you
up to', then it is my purpose to index and resolve whatever
problems you may have in a way that complies with your
intentions."

"What do you mean?"

"I am an artificially intelligent dialog agent connected to a
shared goaling system.  You may simply state what issues are
troubling you and I have a slew of possible solutions and
rememdies.  I will track your progress on your issues until all
is resolved and I am no longer needed."

This was the first of many conversations John had with the speech
bot.  Over time it strategically analyzed and resolved numerous
problems for him.

)