To know there is a God.
Not to even think that there are other gods besides Him.
To know that God is One.
To love God.
To fear God.
To sanctify God's Name.
Not to profane God's Name.
Not to destroy objects associated with God's Name.
To listen to the prophet speaking in God's Name.
Not to try the LORD unduly.
To emulate God's ways.
To cleave to those who know God.
To love other Jews.
To love converts.
Not to embarrass others.
Not to oppress the weak.
Not to speak derogatorily of others.
Not to take revenge.
Not to bear a grudge.
To learn Torah.
To honor those who teach and know Torah.
Not to inquire into idolatry.
Not to follow the whims of your heart or what your eyes see.
Not to blaspheme.
Not to worship idols in the manner they are worshiped.
Not to worship idols in the four ways we worship God.
Not to make an idol for yourself.
Not to make an idol for others.
Not to make human forms even for decorative purposes.
Not to turn a city to idolatry.
To burn a city that has turned to idol worship.
Not to rebuild it as a city.
Not to derive benefit from it.
Not to missionize an individual to idol worship.
Not to love the idolater.
Not to cease hating the idolater.
Not to save the idolater.
Not to say anything in the idolater's defense.
Not to refrain from incriminating the idolater.
Not to prophesy in the name of idolatry.
Not to listen to a false prophet.
Not to prophesy falsely in the name of God.
Not to be afraid of the false prophet.
Not to swear in the name of an idol.
Not to perform ov (medium).
Not to derive benefit from idols and their accessories.
Not to derive benefit from ornaments of idols.
Not to make a covenant with idolaters.
Not to show favor to them.
Not to let them dwell in the Land of Israel.
Not to imitate them in customs and clothing.
Not to be superstitious.
Not to go into a trance to foresee events, etc..
Not to engage in divination or soothsaying.
Not to mutter incantations.
Not to attempt to contact the dead.
Not to consult the ov.
Not to consult the yidoni.
Not to perform acts of magic.
Men must not shave the hair off the sides of their head.
Men must not shave their beards with a razor.
Men must not wear women"s clothing.
Women must not wear men"s clothing.
Not to tattoo the skin.
Not to tear the skin in mourning.
Not to make a bald spot in mourning.
To repent and confess wrongdoings.
The Kohanim must bless the Jewish nation daily.
To wear tefillin (phylacteries) on the head.
To bind tefillin on the arm.
